[RFC] Service Environment Field - stage 1 (#1070)
elastic/ecs: rfcs/text/0002-rfc-environment.md

### Usage with Heartbeat

Synthetics tests are the second major use case to qualify the environment of a service.
An important difference with APM agents is that an Heartbeat agent is likely to simultenaously run synthetics tests on multiple services spread across multiple environments. The qualification of the `service.name`and `service.environment` are defined per `heartbeat.monitor` rather than globally.

The configuration could look like:

```yaml
# EXPERIMENT - NOT SUPPORTED CONFIGURATION SNIPPET
heartbeat.monitors:
- type: http
  id: www-frontend-monitor
  name: Website Frontend Monitor
  service:
    name: www-frontend
    environment: production
  urls: ["https://www.my-ecommerce-company.com/status"]
  schedule: '@every 10s'
  check.response.status: 200
  timeout: 2s
- type: http
  id: www-frontend-monitor-staging
  name: Website Frontend Monitor - Staging
  service:
    name: www-frontend
    environment: staging
  urls: ["https://www.staging.my-ecommerce-company.com/status"]
  schedule: '@every 10s'
  check.response.status: 200
  timeout: 5s
``` 

Note the support in Heartbeat of `service.name` is waiting for https://github.com/elastic/beats/pull/20330

> ### Usage with Filebeat and Metricbeat

Reviewer: This section spends a lot of time on what's effectively an example of how to use the "fields" Beats config option. I don't think anyone is actually pushing for this to be adopted, so I suggest we don't mention it at all in this section, but we flesh out this point in the "concerns" section.

So I think we could rewrite this section with a flow somewhat like this:

* contrary to APM and Hearbeat, Filebeat and Metricbeat have very little semantic knowledge out of the box about services, so they rarely populate these fields.
* However in cases where Fb/Mb are monitoring services that are related to services also monitored by APM/Heartbeat, users may benefit from correlating them.
* The way to do so is to populate `service.*` fields explicitly in the relevant Fb/Mb events.

WDYT? Does this follow the intent of the addition of this field?

Author: I have updated the RFC accordingly.

* ECs don't use abbreviations and `env` is the abbreviation of `environment`.

Note that the `fields.env` field is just an example and it not likely to be used very broadly because for infrastructure elements such as servers, the delineation between environments is often difficult to establish as servers are frequently simulatenaously running production and non production workloads.

We propose to tackle the question of standardisation environment for infrastructure later.

We don't need to evolve Filebeat and Metricbeat configurations initially.

Note: we may want to improve the configuration of Filebeat and Metricbeat later down the road to ease the specification `service.environment` for specific files or metrics that can be associated with a specific service/application.
Today, such configuration is cumbersome requiring to specify a "processor". 

Example of verbose Filebeat configuration today to define `service.name=www-frontend` and `service.environment=production`:

```
---
filebeat.inputs:
  - type: log
    enabled: true
    paths:
      - /var/log/www-frontent/www-frontend.log
processors:
  - add_fields:
      when:

>         ... todo find the syntax to filter on file path

Author: problem solved.

      target: 'service'
      fields:
        name: www-frontend
        environment: production
```

> ## Source data

Reviewer: Since this proposal is about correlating events from different sources via the service fields and the proposed `service.environment` field, I think we should use this section to give relevant event snippets that demonstrate this.

Could you grab one or a few sample APM events, and a sample Heartbeat event in JSON format? Then we can adjust their `service` fields to fit with the example you've been building in the "Usage" section.

And finally to demonstrate the correlation with Metricbeat or Filebeat, we could do the same with one of their events and also adjust its `service` fields to demonstrate how each event across the stack could be correlated. If needed I can help you gather a Filebeat example.

Author: Problem solved

## Concerns

<!--
Stage 1: Identify potential concerns, implementation challenges, or complexity. Spend some time on this. Play devil's advocate. Try to identify the sort of non-obvious challenges that tend to surface later. The goal here is to surface risks early, allow everyone the time to work through them, and ultimately document resolution for posterity's sake.
-->

>  * Beats (Filebeat, Metricbeat, Heartbeat...) document in their configuration files (filebeat.yml, metricbeat.yml...).

Reviewer: A format that's been working well in other RFCs is to capture concerns in a format of concern + resolution.

Since some of the concerns are complex (multi-line, code snippets, etc) I don't think the bullet points work well. Perhaps you could separate each concern with a `###` heading instead? This way you're free to have paragraphs and examples as needed. You can check out how I've done it [in this RFC](https://github.com/elastic/ecs/blob/master/rfcs/text/0007-multiple-users.md#concerns) for an example.

Author: Problem solved

 Example with filebeat.yml

 ```
# Optional fields that you can specify to add additional information to the
# output.
#fields:
#  env: staging
```

 * Using the namespace `service` for `service.environment` could sound awkward to some low level messages (e.g. system events). The rationale is that `service.environment` will only be used to qualify components of the application layer (ie services, application, function) but will not be used to qualify the environment of an infrastructure component (server, virtual machine...).
 * The `environment` field is a good candidate to be reused in other namespace than the `service.*` to cover the Infrastructure use cases.

>  * OpenTelemtry has standardised `deployment.environment`, refering to [Wikipedia: Deployment Environment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deployment_environment). The benefit of `deployment.environment` is that it works better for the characterization of the infrastructure (e.g. physical server, vm): https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/deployment_environment.md

Reviewer: A few typos 👮‍♂️ 

```suggestion
 * OpenTelemetry has standardized `deployment.environment`, referring to [Wikipedia: Deployment Environment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Deployment_environment). The benefit of `deployment.environment` is that it works better for the characterization of the infrastructure (e.g. physical server, vm): https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/master/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/deployment_environment.md
```

Stage 4: Identify at least one real-world, production-ready implementation that uses these updated field definitions. An example of this might be a GA feature in an Elastic application in Kibana.
-->

## People

* @cyrille-leclerc | author
* ? | sponsor

> * @carlos | subject matter expert

Reviewer: Please use Carlo's Github handle @exekias here :-)

Author: Problem solved

     -Delastic.apm.secret_token= \
     -Delastic.apm.application_packages=org.example \
     -jar my-application.jar
```

* Sample filebeat.yml using an `add_fields` processor.

```yaml
filebeat.inputs:
  - type: log
    enabled: true
    paths:
      - /var/log/my/file.log

setup.template.settings:
  index.number_of_shards: 0

output.elasticsearch:
  hosts: ["localhost:9200"]
  protocol: "http"
  username: "elastic"
  password: "elastic"

processors:
  - add_host_metadata: ~
  - add_cloud_metadata: ~
  - add_docker_metadata: ~
  - add_kubernetes_metadata: ~
  - add_fields:
      target: 'service'
      fields:
        environment: staging

# Available log levels are: error, warning, info, debug
logging.level: info

```

## People

* @cyrille-leclerc | author
* ? | sponsor
* @roncohen | subject matter expert
* @carlos | subject matter expert
* ? | grammar, spelling, prose

## References

<!-- Insert any links appropriate to this RFC in this section. -->

### RFC Pull Requests

<!-- An RFC should link to the PRs for each of it stage advancements. -->

> * Stage 0: https://github.com/elastic/ecs/pull/891

Reviewer: Please add back that "References" section.

Note also that we'll want to add the link to this PR in the "RFC Pull Requests" section, below the "stage 0" entry: 

```
* Stage 1: https://github.com/elastic/ecs/pull/1070
```

Author: Problem solved.

Reviewer: Can you add the link to the stage 1 PR as well? 🙏

Author: recursive link :-) I didn't think about it in this case but you are right :-)

-->

### Alternative field name proposed in Beats (Filebeat, Metricbeat, Heartbeat...)

Beats (Filebeat, Metricbeat, Heartbeat...) document in their configuration files (filebeat.yml, metricbeat.yml...) with an alternative field to characterize environments: `fields.env`.

 Example with filebeat.yml

 ```
# Optional fields that you can specify to add additional information to the
# output.
#fields:
#  env: staging
```

### "Service" namespace not suited to characterise infrastructure component

Using the namespace `service` for `service.environment` could sound awkward to some low level messages (e.g. system events). The rationale is that `service.environment` will only be used to qualify components of the application layer (ie services, application, function) but will not be used to qualify the environment of an infrastructure component (server, virtual machine...).

> Note that the `environment` field is a good candidate to be reused in other namespace than the `service.*` to cover the Infrastructure use cases.

Author: Good catch on updating the `tags` fields.
